1 Introduction
In the lectures you have seen synchronization primitives like mutexes, semaphores,
condition variables and barriers which are essential tools for coordination and
synchronization of multi-threaded programs. In Programming Assignment 3
(PA3), we ask you to implement a C++ class for organizing a group study
room in the Information Center (IC). Students and tutors will be represented
by threads and you have to synchronize them using semaphores on the usage
of the shared resource of the study room.
Students arrive at the IC, hoping to use the group study room for a
collaborative study session. They are allowed into the room if it is not already
full and if there is no active study session taking place. For simplicity, we will
assume that a session can only begin when there is a fixed group of students
ready to participate. Additionally, depending on reservation type, one of the
students may act as a tutor for that session.
When a session begins, none of the students inside can leave before the
session ends, and they will not let any new students inside. When the session
ends and a tutor is present, the tutor must first announce the session is
over; only then the students can start leaving. If there is no tutor for that
session, the students will agree upon themselves and leave without such an
announcement. After everyone else has left, the last student also needs to
inform waiting students that the room is now available.
2 Problem Description
In this programming assignment you are tasked with preparing a C++ header
f
ile named "Study.h" implementing the Study class. This class will include
a constructor, arrive, start and leave member methods. You have to
implement all methods except start which will change with respect to test
cases. The details will be explained later in this section.
In our simulation the students will be represented by threads. These
threads will call arrive, start and leave methods sequentially in this order.
In these methods threads will use print statements to indicate their state and
you are tasked to provide synchronization between threads to make these
states obey the following rules:
• When there are enough students for a session inside the room i.e.,
returned from the arrive method, students must start the session.
1
• There cannot be more students in the room than the number required
for a session.
• start method will represent a student starts passing some time in the
room. If there are not enough students for a session, we can interpret
time spent in this method as an individual study or scrolling on Tiktok
while waiting. When there are enough students and a session starts, the
time spent in this method represents an organized session experience. If
a student has finished studying (returned from start and called leave)
and a session has not started, they must leave without participating in
any group session.
• If there is a tutor, non-tutor students must not return from the leave
method until the tutor announces that the session has ended. Other
wise, students can leave freely.
• When a session ends, the last student to leave must notify the waiting
students that are blocked in the arrive method so that they can return
from this method and enter the room.
• While a session is in progress, no one can enter the room before the
session ends and all students and (if exists) the tutor involved in the
session leaves the room.
Weexpect you to solve synchronization problems above using semaphores
and barriers only. When a thread is blocked due to a condition described
above, it should not busy-wait in a loop. Please, note that, if you use mutexes
instead of semaphores, busy-waiting loops will be inevitable. If you do so,
you might lose some points (see Section 9). Basically, start and leave
member methods should not contain any loops.
For other synchronization problems and critical sections that are not de
scribed above, you can use mutexes. For instance, if you want to ensure that
an increment operation on a shared counter is atomic, you can wrap this
operation with mutex lock and unlock methods.
For more information of these rules, how they can be achieved and for a
typical behaviour of a student thread please read the next section. You can
also find some sample runs at 10.
2
3 Study Class
In your simulation you will implement the Study class. In its shared state it
must have some fields to keep number of students, whether there is a tutor
and who is the tutor if exists, whether there is a study session going on
and the necessary synchronization objects. You should initialize and destroy
these fields by writing a proper constructor and destructor. This class is
supposed to have three public member methods: arrive, start and leave.
There will also be another function, start, that will be declared inside test
cases.
Each student will be represented by a POSIX thread (pthread). These
threads will be created and the method they execute will be implemented in
the main program. However, you can safely assume that threads will execute
arrive, start and leave methods in this order.
3.1 Constructor
The constructor requires two input arguments. The first argument is declar
ing how many students are needed to start a study session and the second
argument indicates whether there will be a tutor in the session. The second
parameter can be either 0 or 1. An example call of it is as follows:
$ Study(4,1)
In this case, 4 students are needed for a study session and there will be a
tutor in the session. So, in total, 5 students (including the tutor) must be in
a room to start a study session.
In the constructor, you also need to check the validity of the arguments.
There are two conditions:
• First argument must be a positive integer.
• Second argument must be either 0 or 1.
If these conditions do not hold, your program needs to throw an exception.
3
3.2 Arrive Method
Below, you can find a typical behaviour of a student’s arrive function:
• It first prints: Thread ID: < tid > | Status: Arrived at the
IC.
• It checks if there is an active session already in progress. If so, it blocks,
otherwise it enters the room.– You can keep a boolean variable to check if a session is in progress
or not. You can use a semaphore to block threads in arrive
method when the room is full and a session is ongoing.
• When it arrives, it checks how many students are in the room. There
are two scenarios depending on the tutor option:
If a session does not require a tutor, the student checks whether, includ
ing itself, the number of students in the room has reached the required
session size. If so, this arrival completes the group and the session
starts.
If there has to be a tutor, the student checks whether, excluding itself,
the number of students already inside equals the required number of
students for the session. If this condition holds, this arriving student
becomes the tutor, and together with the existing students, they form
the complete group. The session then starts.
If one of these conditions holds, it starts the session and prints
Thread ID: < tid >| Status: There are enough students,
the study session is starting.
Otherwise it prints
Thread ID: < tid > | Status: Only < n > students
inside, studying individually.
and passes some time waiting for another student to start the session.
• If you are counting the number of people inside the room, this number
must be incremented when someone is entering the room. Note that,
increment operation is not atomic and you might need to use a mutex
for this purpose.
4
3.3 Start Method
Passing some time is simulated using a start method that will be provided
by us when running test cases. For your PA you are not responsible for
how a student passes its time in the location. You can assume that if the
session started when a student was waiting, it automatically joins the session.
Please, declare this method in the class signature but do not implement it.
3.4 Leave Method
At this point, start method finished its execution. Depending on some
conditions, this method prints the following lines:
• If a session has not started it prints
Thread ID: < tid > | Status: No group study formed
while I was waiting, I am leaving.
and leaves the room. Next items apply if a session is in progress.
• If there is the session tutor, and this student is assigned as a tutor it
prints
Thread ID: < tid > | Status: Session tutor speaking,
the session is over.
• If this student is not the session tutor and the tutor has already left, it
prints
Thread ID: < tid > | Status: I am a student and I
am leaving.
• If there is not any tutor in the session, it prints
Thread ID: < tid > | Status: I am a student and I
am leaving.
• The last student that leaves the room also prints
Thread ID: < tid > | Status: All students have left,
the new students can come.
as its last statement and leaves the room.
5
4 General Considerations and Corner Cases
• Multiple threads might try to print at the same time, which might
result in garbled output. You are also responsible for preventing this.
The easiest way to do so is using printf, as it is atomic. If you want to
use streams like cout, you can do this with the help of synchronization
primitives like locks and semaphores.
• When a session is in progress at the study room, allow new students
to enter only after the last student in the session leaves, by using
semaphore API methods.
• Consider using a barrier to pick the tutor and printing its output. i.e:
when a study group is formed, students should wait in the barrier until
a tutor prints its output
• If you’re using a barrier in your implementation while synchronizing the
exit outputs, do not forget to initialize the barrier in the beginning.
• Do not forget that when there are no session on the room, students
could arrive and leave freely without blocking.
• Even though a tutor is picked for every session that is formed if tutor
is present, it is also referred as a student in the document in general to
prevent confusion.
• In order to select the tutor when a session group is formed, you might
consider using a special field in your class of type pthread
t and set it
to the tutor thread’s thread ID when You pick the tutor in the arrive
method. You might need this information in the leave method because
the tutor prints a distinct line.
• In leave method, in order to understand if the current thread is the tu
tor, you have to compare pthread objects. You should use pthread
equal
library method instead of ”==” operator for the comparison.
5 Correctness
There are correctness conditions for the child(student) threads. First of all,
it must be ensured that main thread always finishes the last and waits until
6
all of its children threads terminate. Afterwards, main thread should output-main terminates to the console as the last thing.
Correctness of the student threads depends on the order and interleaving
of strings they print to the console. To make things easier, let us declare
some variables and give names to strings they print to the console at various
steps first:
• total num: The total number of threads.
• student count: The number of students in a session, excluding the
session tutor.
• all count: The number of students in a session, including the study
session tutor.
• num sessions: The number of study sessions done
• init: The string "Thread ID: < tid > | Status: Arrived at the
IC."
• enter passtime: The string Thread ID: < tid > | Status: Only
<x> students inside, studying individually.
• enter session: The string Thread ID: < tid > | Status: There
are enough students, the study session is starting.
• everybody left: The string Thread ID: < tid > | Status: All
students have left, the new students can come.
• tutor leaving: The string Thread ID: < tid > | Status: Session
tutor speaking, the session is over.
• student leaving: The string Thread ID: < tid > | Status: I am
a student and I am leaving.
• no session: The string Thread ID: < tid > | Status: No group
study formed while I was waiting, I am leaving.
Then, for any execution of your program with valid inputs, the following
conditions must be satisfied. Note that due to the multi-threaded nature
of the program, different executions may produce different valid outputs.
Therefore, your output is not expected to match the sample run text files
line by line; instead, make sure that your program satisfies below conditions:
7
• There must be exactly total num times init strings printed to the con
sole
• Theremustbeexactly total num−num sessionstimes enter passtime
strings printed to the console
• Theremustbeexactly num sessionstimesenter session strings printed
to the console
• Theremustbeexactly num sessionstimeseverybody left strings printed
to the console
• Theremustbeexactly num sessionstimestutor leaving strings printed
to the console
• Theremustbeexactly num sessions∗student count times student leaving
strings printed to the console
• There must be exactly total num−(num sessions∗(all count)) times
no session strings printed to the console
• For each thread init, enter passtime or enter session, tutor leaving
or student leaving(if session exists), no session(if no session exists)
must be printed to the console in this order
• Foreachsession after enter session string, tutor leaving must be printed
to the console before any student leaving
• For each session after enter session, init strings might be printed
in-between sessions but, no enter passtime nor enter session can be
printed to the console before everybody left string
See Section 10, for some sample output obeying the correctness conditions
above.
6 Useful Information and Tips
• First, read this document from beginning to the end. Make sure that
you understand what is the problem you need to solve and what is
expected from you. You can mark important points and take some
8
notes in this step. Then, develop your solution using pen and paper
(maybe by writing an abstract pseudo-code). Then, start implementing
the solution considering tips in this section, corner cases section and
the grading section. Complete one grading item at a time obeying the
preconditions. Make sure that your improvements and refinements do
not violate previously completed grading items.
• If you have no idea on how to solve the the problem or where to use
semaphores/barriers, please, start simple by reading and solving prob
lems in Little Book of Semaphores. First read a problem and try to
solve it yourself. Once you spend enough time on it, you can move to
the solution. Then, you can try to understand whether your solution
was correct or why the solution in the book works.
• If you wish to use a barrier, you can use off-the-shelf one like a pthread
barrier or you can implement your own reusable barrier. Little Book
of Semaphores contain semaphore based barrier implementations. Please
note that solutions in that book are written in pseudo-code and might
not be directly translated into C++ code. We also provide Python im
plementations for these barrier algorithms and again, Python Threads
Library works completely different than pthreads. You should take
this book for a guidance, not embrace as a solution.
• Take a look at the behavior of the pthread semaphores before using
them.
• Ensure your program executions obey the correctness format. See Sec
tion 10 for correctness.
• Ensure that your application works correctly in cases where there are
multiple sessions, such as eight threads or twelve threads when the
session size is four.
• Your program should terminate properly, you will lose points if your
program cannot terminate all the threads safely or in case of missing
outputs. This requirement also entails that your threads should not
have a deadlocking execution.
• You have to use pthreads (POSIX Threads) library and submit C++
f
ile. Do not forget to use #include<pthread> statement. Any other
thread library will not be accepted as a solution.
9
• Do not forget to use-lpthread option while compiling.
7 Supplementary Information
In this section, we provide further resources and tools that might help you
during your implementation.
7.1 Posix Threads API
sem
The pthread semaphores behave like Linux Zemaphores, not like the orig
inal Dijkstra semaphores we have seen in the lectures. So, before using
the pthread semaphores, take a look at the manual page of the command
wait or check the web page. If you wish, you can implement Dijkstra
semaphores using pthread condition variables and mutexes as in the lec
tures but it is discouraged since as stated below Helgrind and TSan can only
detect race conditions and Lock-Order Inversions(deadlocks) if and only if
semaphores and barriers are created using pthreads api or Annotations are
made to user defined Semaphores which is a highly advanced concept that is
not expected from you for this course. See Section 7.2 for more details. The
choice is yours. In the report you will provide in the submission package,
you have to explain which synchronization primitives you used and how you
implemented them if you choose to implement them on your own.
7.2 Usage of Helgrind and Thread Sanitizer (TSan)
Since you’ll solve a synchronization problem for PA3, you may find yourselves
dispersed in a non-synchronized environment and it is sometimes overwhelm
ing to search for race conditions in a multi-threaded program by yourself.
Even if they are not fool-proof as stated in the recitation document, Hel
grind- TSan (please check this link ), these tools will help you detect race
conditions and deadlocks much more faster if you are familiar with your code.
8 Submission Guidelines
For this homework, you are expected to submit two files.
10
• Study.h: Your C++ implementation of the header file where your
constructor, arrive and leave methods are implemented.
• report.pdf: In your report, you must present the flow of your arrive
and leave methods as a pseudo code. You discuss which synchroniza
tion mechanisms (semaphores, mutexes and barriers) you have chosen,
how you implemented, used or adapted them to suit your needs and
provide formal arguments on why your code satisfies the correctness
criteria described above.
During the submission of this homework, you will see two different sec
tions on SUCourse. For this assignment you are expected to submit your
f
iles separately. You should NOT zip any of your files. While you are
submitting your homework, please submit your report to “PA3– REPORT
Submission”, and your code to “PA3– CODE Submission”. SUCourse will
not accept if your files are in a different format, so please be careful. If
your submission does not fit the format specified above, your grade may be
penalized up to 10 points.
9 Grading
Grading will be done automatically. If automated tests fail, your code will not
be manually inspected for partial points. Some students might be randomly
called for an oral exam to explain their implementations and reports.
• Class Interface (10 pts): When we include your header file to our
cpp program, we can access the constructor, arrive and leave meth
ods, and when we use them in our program we do not get any runtime
errors.
• Exception Handling (10 pts): When the constructor is called with
improper values, your program throws an exception.
• No Sessions Case (15 pts)– Without Tutors (10 pts): When there are no tutors, if the
students are never able to participate in a session, your outputs
f
it our correctness criteria.
11
– With Tutors (5 pts): When there are tutors, if the students
are never able to participate in a session, your outputs fit our
correctness criteria.
• At Most 1 Session Case (15 pts)– Without Tutors (10 pts): When there are no tutors, if the
students are able to participate in at most one session, your out
puts fit our correctness criteria.– With Tutors (5 pts): When there are tutors, if the students
are able to participate in at most one session, your outputs fit our
correctness criteria.
• Multiple Sessions Case (15 pts)– Without Tutors (10 pts): When there are no tutors, if the
students participate in multiple sessions, your outputs fit our cor
rectness criteria.– With Tutors (5 pts): When there are tutors, if the students
participate in multiple sessions, your outputs fit our correctness
criteria.
• Last student in a session informs others (10 pts): When a ses
sion ends, and all the students have left, the last student prints the
appropriate string.
• Report(20 pts): Your report explains your thread methods, how you
implemented them, what kind of synchronization mechanisms you used
and adapted and why you think that it is correct (-5 pts if your report
is not in pdf format).
Important Note: It is possible to solve this problem using only mutexes.
In this case, your implementation will suffer from the busy-waiting problem
even though you do not use spin-locks. When a student comes when there is
a session already in progress, it has to wait in a loop until the current session
is over. Since this is one of the fundamental problems we were trying to avoid
in the lectures, you will lose 20 points, if your implementation suffers from
the busy-waiting problem. Note that you do not face such a problem if you
use semaphores.
12
10 Sample Runs
Sample runs are included in the PA3 bundle as text files, allowing you to
test your solution with various inputs. Each text file is named starting with
either ‘study test‘ or ‘study test2‘, indicating the corresponding test class.
The remainder of the file name follows the format ‘x y z‘. To test your
solution, you can execute your code using the following command:
1 $ ./study_test x y z
i.e. if file name is study test 4 4 1.txt , then in your comment line you
should run
1 $ ./study_test 4 4 1
